.\" mkinitramfs.cmdline(7) manual page
.\" See COPYING and COPYRIGHT files for corresponding information.
.Dd April 13, 2025
.Dt MKINITRAMFS.CMDLINE 7
.Os
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh NAME
.Nm mkinitramfs.cmdline
.Nd mkinitramfs' kernel command-line parameters
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Xr mkinitramfs 8
utility provides a way to control configuration dynamically via kernel
parameters without needing to regenerate initramfs image.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss General Parameters
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Sy debug Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Enable debug mode.
.Pp
.It Sy break Ns = Ns Aq BREAKPOINT
Specify breakpoint where shell should be invoked.
Useful for debugging.
.Pp
List of built-in breakpoints:
.Bl -tag -width XX -compact -offset XX
.It \(bu boot
.It \(bu root
.El
.Pp
Hooks can provide their own breakpoints.
See source code of hooks for more information.
.Pp
.It Sy root Ns = Ns Aq UUID | LABEL | /dev/* | PARTUUID
Specify which way initramfs will use to look up root filesystem.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width PARTUUID -compact
.It UUID
Lookup device by uuid.
.It LABEL
Lookup device by label.
.It /dev/*
Lookup device by full path.
.It PARTUUID
Lookup device by partition uuid.
.El
.Pp
Initramfs must contain
.Sy blkid
utility for ability to use UUID, LABEL, PARTUUID.
.Sy Note :
PARTUUID only supported in
.Sy util-linux Ns '
.Xr blkid 8 .
.Pp
.It Sy root_type Ns = Ns Aq TYPE
.It Sy rootfstype Ns = Ns Aq TYPE
Explicitly set root filesystem type.
Kernel must support specified type.
.Pp
.It Sy rootdelay Ns = Ns Aq DELAY
Specify maximum number of seconds to wait for root device instead of
the default 30 seconds.
.Pp
.It Sy root_opts Ns = Ns Aq OPTS
.It Sy rootflags Ns = Ns Aq OPTS
See
.Xr fstab 5
fourth field.
.El
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Hooks Parameters
Initramfs must contain appropriate hooks for ability to use below
parameters.
.Pp
The parameters for
.Sy LVM
hook are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy lvm_tag Ns = Ns Aq TAG
Specify LVM tag which will be used to trigger LVM.
.Pp
This option will be ignored if
.Sy lvm_name Ns / Ns Sy lvm_group
was specified.
.It Sy lvm_name Ns = Ns Aq NAME
Specify LVM name which will be used to trigger LVM.
.Pp
.Sy lvm_group
(see below) must be specified.
.It Sy lvm_group Ns = Ns Aq GROUP
Specify LVM group which will be used to trigger LVM.
.It Sy lvm_discard Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Pass
.Em issue_discards
to LVM.
Leave empty to disable.
Useful for SSD's.
.El
.Pp
The parameters for
.Sy LUKS
hook are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy luks_name Ns = Ns Aq NAME
Specify which name will be registered to mapping table after
.Xr cryptsetup 8
unlocks LUKS root.
.It Sy luks_root Ns = Ns Aq UUID | LABEL | /dev/* | PARTUUID
See
.Sy root
(above) for details.
.It Sy luks_discard Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Pass
.Dq --allow-discards
to
.Xr cryptsetup 8 .
Leave empty to disable.
.Pp
Useful for SSD's, but you must know that security will be decreased.
.El
.Pp
The parameters for the
.Sy resume
hook are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy resume Ns = Ns Aq UUID | LABEL | /dev/* | PARTUUID
Specifies the device to resume from hibernation.
This can be either a swap \fIpartition\fP or the block
\fIdevice containing the hibernation image file\fP.
The lookup method (UUID, LABEL, etc.) works the same way as for the
.Sy root
parameter (see above).
If set on the kernel command line, this overrides any
.Sy resume
value set in
.Xr mkinitramfs.config 5 .
.It Sy resume_offset Ns = Ns Aq OFFSET
\fBRequired only when resuming from a file.\fP
Specifies the physical offset of the hibernation image file on the
device specified by the
.Sy resume
parameter.
The offset can usually be obtained using tools like
.Xr filefrag 8 .
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh EXAMPLES
Specify
.Sy root
option argument:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
vmlinuz initrd=\einitramfs root=/dev/sda1 [...]
.Ed
.Pp
Disable
.Dq discards
for
.Sy LUKS
and
.Sy LVM :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
vmlinuz initrd=\einitramfs luks_discard= lvm_discard= [...]
.Ed
.Pp
Pass arguments to real init:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
vmlinuz initrd=\einitramfs [...] -- arguments
.Ed
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mkinitramfs.config 5 ,
.Xr mkinitramfs.hooks 7 ,
.Xr mkinitramfs 8
.\" vim: cc=72 tw=70
.\" End of file.
