.\" mkinitramfs.config(5) manual page
.\" See COPYING and COPYRIGHT files for corresponding information.
.Dd February 22, 2025
.Dt MKINITRAMFS.CONFIG 5
.Os
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh NAME
.Nm mkinitramfs.config
.Nd configuration file for mkinitramfs
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/mkinitramfs/config
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sy mkinitramfs
configuration file is a list of environment variables.
Each variable must be written in POSIX way, bashism not allowed.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
key=value
.Ed
.Pp
If value contains spaces it must be quoted.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
key="value value2"
.Ed
.Pp
If value contains special symbols like
.Ql $ ,
it must be escaped or quoted using single quotes.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
key=\e\e$value
key='$value'
.Ed
.Pp
If line exceeded maximum space on your display and you want to make it
more readable, you can concatenate them.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
key=value
key="${key}value"
.Ed
.Pp
If you want to temporary undefine variable without actually deleting
it, you can simply prepend
.Ql # .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#key=value
.Ed
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss General Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy monolith Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Monolithic kernel means kernel with built-in modules.
If you didn't build kernel yourself, then in most cases you have
modular kernel and you don't need to enable this option.
To check if you have monolithic you need to check if
.Dq /lib/modules/<kernel_version>/modules
exist.
If this directory doesn't exist you probably have monolithic kernel
which means you need to set
.Sy monolith
to
.Sy 1 .
.It Sy hostonly Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Hostonly mode enumerates
.Xr sysfs 5
and copies only necessary modules instead of copying all modules.
Which means that this mode can dramatically reduce initramfs size.
.Pp
This option will be ignored if
.Sy monolith
was set to
.Sy 1 .
.It Sy compress Ns = Ns Aq COMMAND Op ARGS ...
Specify which command will be used to compress initramfs image.
.Pp
There is a lot of commands you can use, such as:
.Bl -tag -width XXXXX -compact
.It xz
.It zstd
.It gzip
.It bzip2
.It ... and many more ...
.El
.Pp
You can set compression level by specifying
.Dq Li -[0-9]
in
.Em ARGS .
.It Sy root Ns = Ns Aq UUID | LABEL | /dev/* | PARTUUID
Specify which way
.Xr mkinitramfs 8
will use to look up root filesystem.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width PARTUUID -compact
.It UUID
Lookup device by uuid.
.It LABEL
Lookup device by label.
.It /dev/*
Lookup device by full path.
.It PARTUUID
Lookup device by partition uuid.
.El
.Pp
You must install
.Sy blkid
utility (available in
.Sy toybox ,
.Sy busybox ,
.Sy util-linux
or
.Sy e2fsprogs )
for ability to use UUID, LABEL, PARTUUID.
.Pp
.Sy Note :
.Em PARTUUID
only supported in
.Sy util-linux'
.Xr blkid 8 .
.It Sy root_type Ns = Ns Aq TYPE
Explicitly set root filesystem type instead of automatically
discovering via
.Pa /proc/mounts .
This option must be specified if you booted from Live CD.
.It Sy root_opts Ns = Ns Aq OPTS
See
.Xr fstab 5
fourth field.
.It Sy extrafiles Ns = Ns Aq FILE ...
Add extra
.Em FILE Ns s
to
.Sy initramfs
image.
.It Sy hooks Ns = Ns Aq HOOK ...
Hooks provide a flexible way to extend
.Xr mkinitramfs 8
with custom scripts.
.Sy Hooks are launched in the order in which they are specified .
.Pp
List of shipped by default hooks:
.Bl -enum -width 2n -compact
.It
lvm
.It
luks
.It
.Lk https://core.suckless.org/smdev/ smdev
.It
.Lk https://git.busybox.net/busybox/plain/docs/mdev.txt mdev
.It
proc (CONFIG_UEVENT_HELPER)
.It
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/mdevd/ mdevd
.It
.Lk https://github.com/eudev\-project/eudev eudev
.It
loadkeys
.It
loadkmap
.It
resume (resume from hibernation)
.It
systemd-udevd
.El
.Pp
See below how to use them.
.Pp
If hook doesn't have options, then it's not yet documented or can be
used "as is".
.Pp
More detailed information and how to write your own hooks described in
.Xr mkinitramfs.hooks 7 .
.El
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Hooks Options
.\" ``````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````
The
.Sy lvm
hook has the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy lvm_tag Ns = Ns Aq TAG
Specify LVM tag which will be used to trigger LVM.
.Pp
This option will be ignored if
.Sy lvm_name Ns / Ns Sy lvm_group
was specified.
.It Sy lvm_name Ns = Ns Aq NAME
Specify LVM name which will be used to trigger LVM.
.Pp
.Sy lvm_group
(see below) must be specified.
.It Sy lvm_group Ns = Ns Aq GROUP
Specify LVM group which will be used to trigger LVM.
.It Sy lvm_config Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Include
.Pa /etc/lvm/lvm.conf
in initramfs.
.It Sy lvm_discard Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Pass
.Dq issue_discards
to LVM.
Useful for SSD's.
.El
.\" ``````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````
.Pp
The
.Sy luks
hook has the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy luks_key Ns = Ns Aq PATH
Specify location to key.
.Pp
GPG-encrypted key currently not supported.
.It Sy luks_name Ns = Ns Aq NAME
Specify which name will be registered to mapping table after
.Xr cryptsetup 8
unlocks LUKS root.
.It Sy luks_root Ns = Ns Aq UUID | LABEL | /dev/* | PARTUUID
See
.Sy root
(above) for details.
.It Sy luks_header Ns = Ns Aq PATH
Specify location to detached header.
.It Sy luks_discard Ns = Ns Aq 0 | 1
Pass
.Dq --allow-discards
to
.Xr cryptsetup 8 ,
that allows the use of discard (TRIM) requests for your luks device.
.Pp
.Sy Warning :
This option may have a negative security impact.
See
.Xr cryptsetup 8
for more information.
.El
.\" ``````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````
.Pp
The
.Sy loadkeys
and
.Sy loadkmap
hooks has the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy keymap_path Ns = Ns Aq PATH
Specify location to binary keymap.
.Pp
Both hooks are for the same purpose.
One of them
.Po
.Sy loadkeys
.Pc
uses
.Sy GNU kmod's loadkeys(8) ,
and another
.Po
.Sy loadkmap
.Pc
uses
.Sy busybox's loadkmap .
Use the appropriate, not both of them.
.El
.\" ``````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````````
.Pp
The
.Sy resume
hook has the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy resume Ns = Ns Aq UUID | LABEL | /dev/* | PARTUUID
Specify which way
.Xr mkinitramfs 8
will use to look up swap device to resume from hibernation.
.Pp
See
.Sy root
(above) for argument details.
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/mkinitramfs/config
Configuration file for
.Xr mkinitramfs 8 .
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh EXAMPLES
Remember, these just examples!
.Sy Don't copy blindly !
Your configuration may (and should) differ.
.Pp
.Bl -enum -width 1n -compact
.It
Specify root device and add
.Sy eudev
hook:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hooks=eudev
root=/dev/sda1
.Ed
.Pp
.It
Specify root device, install monolith kernel (without modules) and add
.Sy proc
(CONFIG_UEVENT_HELPER) hook.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hooks=proc
monolith=1
root=/dev/nvme0n1p1
.Ed
.Pp
.It
Specify root device, copy only host modules for modular kernel,
compress initramfs image through
.Dq gzip -9 ,
and add
.Sy mdevd
hook:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hostonly=1
hooks=mdevd
compress="gzip -9"
root=PARTUUID=8e05009d-a1d5-4fdb-b407-b0e79360555c
.Ed
.Pp
.It
Specify root device and root filesystem type, add
.Sy eudev
and
.Sy loadkmap
hooks, and specify keymap path:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
root_type=f2fs
hooks="eudev loadkmap"
root=UUID=13bcb7cc-8fe5-4f8e-a1fe-e4b5b336f3ef
keymap_path=/usr/share/bkeymaps/colemak/en-latin9.bmap
.Ed
.Pp
The same example as above, but use
.Sy GNU kbd's loadkeys
instead of
.Sy busybox's loadkmap :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
root_type=f2fs
hooks="eudev loadkeys"
root=UUID=13bcb7cc-8fe5-4f8e-a1fe-e4b5b336f3ef
keymap_path=/usr/share/kbd/keymaps/i386/colemak/en-latin9.map.gz
.Ed
.Pp
.It
LUKS setup:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hooks="mdev luks"
root=LABEL=my_root
luks_discard=1
luks_key=/root/key
luks_header=/root/header
luks_root=PARTUUID=35f923c5-083a-4950-a4da-e611d0778121
.Ed
.Pp
.It
LUKS/LVM setup:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
compress="lz4 -9"
hooks="eudev lvm luks"
root=/dev/disk/by-uuid/aa82d7bb-ab2b-4739-935f-fd8a5c9a6cb0
luks_discard=1
luks_root=/dev/sdb2
lvm_config=1
lvm_discard=1
lvm_name=lvm1
lvm_group=lvm_grp2
.Ed
.Pp
.It
LUKS setup + resume from hibernation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hostonly=1
compress="gzip --fast"
hooks="eudev luks lvm resume"
root=/dev/mapper/root
root_type=ext4
resume=/dev/mapper/swap
luks_discard=1
luks_name=crypt
luks_root=/dev/sda2
.Ed
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mkinitramfs.cmdline 7 ,
.Xr mkinitramfs.hooks 7 ,
.Xr mkinitramfs 8
.\" vim: cc=72 tw=70
.\" End of file.
