# See COPYING and COPYRIGHT files for corresponding information.

=pod

=head1 NAME

mkinitramfs.cmdline - mkinitramfs' kernel command-line parameters

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<mkinitramfs> provides a way to control configuration dynamically via
kernel parameters without needing to regenerate initramfs image.

=head1 GENERAL PARAMETERS

=over 8

=item B<debug>=1

Enable debug mode.

=item B<break>=I<BREAKPOINT>

Specify breakpoint where shell should be invoked.  Useful for
debugging.

List of builtin breakpoints:

=over

=item * boot

=item * root

=back

Hooks can provide their own breakpoints.  See source code of hooks for
more information.

=item B<root>=I<UUID>|I<LABEL>|I</dev/*>|I<PARTUUID>

Specify which way initramfs will use to look up root filesystem.

=over 10

=item I<UUID>

Lookup device by uuid.

=item I<LABEL>

Lookup device by label.

=item I</dev/*>

Lookup device by full path.

=item I<PARTUUID>

Lookup device by partition uuid.

=back

Initramfs must contain B<blkid> utility for ability to use I<UUID>,
I<LABEL>, I<PARTUUID>.  B<Note>: I<PARTUUID> only supported in
B<util-linux>' L<blkid(8)>.

=item B<root_type>=I<TYPE>

=item B<rootfstype>=I<TYPE>

Explicitly set root filesystem type.  Kernel must support specified
type.

=item B<rootdelay>=I<DELAY>

Specify maximum number of seconds to wait for root device.

Default: 30.

=item B<root_opts>=I<OPTS>

=item B<rootflags>=I<OPTS>

See L<fstab(5)> fourth field.

=back

=head1 HOOKS PARAMETERS

Initramfs must contain appropriate hooks for ability to use below
parameters.

=head2 LVM

=over 8

=item B<lvm_tag>=I<TAG>

Specify LVM tag which will be used to trigger LVM.

This option will be ignored if B<lvm_name>/B<lvm_group> was specified.

=item B<lvm_name>=I<NAME>

Specify LVM name which will be used to trigger LVM.

B<lvm_group> (see below) must be specified.

=item B<lvm_group>=I<GROUP>

Specify LVM group which will be used to trigger LVM.

=item B<lvm_discard>=1

Pass I<issue_discards> to LVM.  Leave empty to disable.
Useful for SSD's.

=back

=head2 LUKS

=over 8

=item B<luks_name>=I<NAME>

Specify which name will be registered to mapping table after
L<cryptsetup(8)> unlocks LUKS root.

=item B<luks_root>=I<UUID>|I<LABEL>|I</dev/*>|I<PARTUUID>

See B<root> (above) for details.

=item B<luks_discard>=1

Pass C<--allow-discards> to L<cryptsetup(8)>.  Leave empty to disable.

Useful for SSD's, but you must know that security will be decreased.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 ROOT

  vmlinuz initrd=\initramfs root=/dev/sda1 ...

=head2 DISABLE DISCARD

  vmlinuz initrd=\initramfs luks_discard= lvm_discard= ...

=head2 PASS ARGUMENT TO REAL INIT

  vmlinuz initrd=\initramfs ... -- args

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<mkinitramfs(8)>, L<mkinitramfs.config(5)>, L<mkinitramfs.hooks(7)>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72:tw=70
# End of file.
