# See COPYING and COPYRIGHT files for corresponding information.

=pod

=head1 NAME

mkinitramfs.config - configuration file for mkinitramfs

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B</etc/mkinitramfs/config>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<mkinitramfs> configuration file is a list of environment variables.
Each variable must be written in POSIX way, bashism not allowed.

Example:

  key=value

If value contains spaces it must be quoted.

  key="value value2"

If value contains special symbols like C<$>, it must be escaped or
quoted using single quotes.

  key=\\$value
  key='$value'

If line exceeded maximum space on your display and you want to make it
more readable, you can concatenate them.

  key=value
  key="${key}value"

If you want to temporary undefine variable without actually deleting
it, you can simply prepend C<#>.

  #key=value

=head1 MAN PAGE SYNTAX

  |    - OR
  *    - any value
  [a]  - optional value
  ...  - can be repeated

=head1 GENERAL OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<monolith>=1

Monolithic kernel means kernel with builtin modules.  If you didn't
build kernel yourself, then in most cases you have modular kernel and
you don't need to enable this option.  To check if you have monolithic
you need to check if F<< /lib/modules/<kernel version>/modules >>
exist.  If this directory doesn't exist you probably have monolithic
kernel which means you need to set B<monolith> to B<1>.

=item B<hostonly>=1

Hostonly mode enumerates L<sysfs(5)> and copies only necessary modules
instead of copying all modules.  Which means that this mode can
dramatically reduce initramfs size.

This option will be ignored if B<monolith> was set to B<1>.

=item B<compress>=I<COMMAND> [I<ARGS>...]

Specify which command will be used to compress initramfs image.

There is a lot of commands you can use, such as:

  - xz
  - zstd (if supported by kernel)
  - gzip
  - bzip2
  - and many more ...

You can set compression level by specifying C<-[0-9]> in I<ARGS>.

=item B<root>=I<UUID>|I<LABEL>|I</dev/*>|I<PARTUUID>

Specify which way B<mkinitramfs> will use to look up root filesystem.

=over 8

=item I<UUID>

Lookup device by uuid.

=item I<LABEL>

Lookup device by label.

=item I</dev/*>

Lookup device by full path.

=item I<PARTUUID>

Lookup device by partition uuid.

=back

You must install B<blkid> utility (available in B<toybox>, B<busybox>,
B<util-linux> or B<e2fsprogs>) for ability to use I<UUID>, I<LABEL>,
I<PARTUUID>.

B<Note:> I<PARTUUID> only supported in B<util-linux'>
L<blkid(8)>.

=item B<root_type>=I<TYPE>

Explicitly set root filesystem type instead of automatically
discovering via F</proc/mounts>.  This option must be specified if you
booted from Live CD.

=item B<root_opts>=I<OPTS>

See L<fstab(5)> fourth field.

=item B<extrafiles>=I<FILE>...

Add extra I<FILE>s to B<mkinitramfs> image.

=item B<hooks>=I<HOOK>...

Hooks provide a flexible way to extend B<mkinitramfs> with custom
scripts.  You must know that
I<hooks are launched in the order in which they are specified>.

List of shipped by default hooks:

=over 8

=item I<lvm>

LVM support.

=item I<luks>

LUKS support.

=item I<smdev>

L<smdev|https://core.suckless.org/smdev/> support.

=item I<mdev>

L<mdev|https://git.busybox.net/busybox/plain/docs/mdev.txt> support.

=item I<proc>

C<CONFIG_UEVENT_HELPER> support.

=item I<mdevd>

L<mdevd|https://skarnet.org/software/mdevd/> support.

=item I<eudev>

L<eudev|https://github.com/eudev-project/eudev> support.

=item I<keymap>

Keymap support.

=item I<resume>

Resume from hibernation support.

=item I<systemd-udevd>

systemd udevd support.

=back

See below how to use them.

If hook doesn't have options, then it's not yet documented or can be
used "as is".

More detailed information and how to write your own hooks described in
L<mkinitramfs.hooks(7)>.

=back

=head1 HOOKS OPTIONS

=head2 LVM

=over 8

=item B<lvm_tag>=I<TAG>

Specify LVM tag which will be used to trigger LVM.

This option will be ignored if B<lvm_name>/B<lvm_group> was specified.

=item B<lvm_name>=I<NAME>

Specify LVM name which will be used to trigger LVM.

B<lvm_group> (see below) must be specified.

=item B<lvm_group>=I<GROUP>

Specify LVM group which will be used to trigger LVM.

=item B<lvm_config>=1

Include F</etc/lvm/lvm.conf> in initramfs.

=item B<lvm_discard>=1

Pass C<issue_discards> to LVM.  Useful for SSD's.

=back

=head2 LUKS

=over 8

=item B<luks_key>=I<PATH>

Specify location to key.

GPG-encrypted key currently not supported.

=item B<luks_name>=I<NAME>

Specify which name will be registered to mapping table after
L<cryptsetup(8)> unlocks LUKS root.

=item B<luks_root>=I<UUID>|I<LABEL>|I</dev/*>|I<PARTUUID>

See B<root> (above) for details.

=item B<luks_header>=I<PATH>

Specify location to detached header.

=item B<luks_discard>=1

Pass C<--allow-discards> to L<cryptsetup(8)>.
Useful for SSD's, but you must know that security will be decreased.

=back

=head2 KEYMAP

=over 8

=item B<keymap_path>=I<PATH>

Specify location to binary keymap.

Currently, this hook supports loading keymap only via
B<busybox' loadkmap>.

B<kbd's loadkeys> not supported.

=back

=head2 RESUME

=over 8

=item B<resume>=I<UUID>|I<LABEL>|I</dev/*>|I<PARTUUID>

Specify which way B<mkinitramfs> will use to look up swap device to
resume from hibernation.

See B<root> (above) for argument details.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Remember, these just examples! B<Don't copy blindly>!
Your configuration may (and should) differ.

=head2 ROOT

  hooks=eudev
  root=/dev/sda1

=head2 ROOT + MONOLITH + PROC (CONFIG_UEVENT_HELPER)

  hooks=proc
  monolith=1
  root=/dev/nvme0n1p1

=head2 ROOT + COMPRESS

  hostonly=1
  hooks=mdevd
  compress="gzip -9"
  root=PARTUUID=8e05009d-a1d5-4fdb-b407-b0e79360555c

=head2 ROOT + KEYMAP

  root_type=f2fs
  hooks="eudev keymap"
  root=UUID=13bcb7cc-8fe5-4f8e-a1fe-e4b5b336f3ef
  keymap_path=/usr/share/bkeymaps/colemak/en-latin9.bmap

=head2 ROOT + LUKS

  hooks="mdev luks"
  root=LABEL=my_root
  luks_discard=1
  luks_key=/root/key
  luks_header=/root/header
  luks_root=PARTUUID=35f923c5-083a-4950-a4da-e611d0778121

=head2 ROOT + LVM + LUKS

  compress="lz4 -9"
  hooks="eudev lvm luks"
  root=/dev/disk/by-uuid/aa82d7bb-ab2b-4739-935f-fd8a5c9a6cb0
  luks_discard=1
  luks_root=/dev/sdb2
  lvm_config=1
  lvm_discard=1
  lvm_name=lvm1
  lvm_group=lvm_grp2

=head2 ROOT + LUKS + LVM + RESUME

  hostonly=1
  compress="gzip --fast"
  hooks="eudev luks lvm resume"
  root=/dev/mapper/root
  root_type=ext4
  resume=/dev/mapper/swap
  luks_discard=1
  luks_name=crypt
  luks_root=/dev/sda2

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</etc/mkinitramfs/config>

Configuration file for L<mkinitramfs(8)>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<mkinitramfs(8)>, L<mkinitramfs.cmdline(7)>, L<mkinitramfs.hooks(7)>

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72:tw=70
# End of file.
